Nonjudgemental
--------------

Observe first. As objectively as possible.
Don't latch onto a solution.
Sometimes it's just random variation. You need to do more tests.
Sometimes it's something you don't know that you don't know. Study.
The well-trodden paths don't lead you to new ideas, new results. Enjoy the rough terrain, it may open up into a new vista.

The discipline to observe. Tease apart the threads of the problem (process of elimination)



Signs of problems with Moisture content
---------------------------------------

- starts up more slowly than with dry fuel
- slightly more smoke
- ramps up quickly but slows down quickly


Art project idea: Pyrex lantern stove.

Science project idea: Pyrex cylinder, pyrex sheet in middle, photo the entire run, explain with interactive web page.

Prototype: Half-cylinder wire mesh. How big of a windscreen?



Variability 2
-------------

Run 10-30 tests of batch combustor.
Plot them all.
Calculate the variance, other params? (look at Baldwin's variance charts. Get feedback from engineers like Colton...)


Variability
-----------

In 2110, teams would test their machines again and again until they worked. After 30 tries, it worked 7 times. 

If you ask them about it, they would say, "It's worked seven times."

In reality, it works 23% of the time (less than 1 out of 4 times)

Variability is also crucial when you think about cooking. Food often isn't cooked at some average temperature. You'll burn it if it gets too hot. Too much variability in power output of the stove risks making it a worthless product.

Efficiency...


---

Day 17: "Tell me what you don't like" to the people that have replied to emails. -------

---

Sizing Tool
-----------

xkcd guy standing next to gasifier.
As you twiddle sizing params "5 cups of water", the size of the gasifier next to the guy scales up and down.

calculates in terms of cooked quantities "3 cups beans" "100 fried bananas" "20 cups of tea"


Contributing
------------

- Anyone that would be interested in building the design? (i.e. they're near rice husk, working with a community)

- How to improve fabrication quality (keep in mind we're targeting rural mechanics that have hand tool, welders, and lots of time)

- Are you in and around Seattle? Would like to fabricate prototypes sometime in the near future.

- Eventually, photographer to do the art/science part with the Pyrex.

Get in touch!





Design Tables for Rice Husk Stoves
----------------------------------

... eventually!


Worthwhile variations
---------------------

How do you choose?
- dimensions on the order of mm, cm, m
- infinite!
- combinatorial, too.

Some notes from Notes on the Synthesis of Form ?

Outline the ones that I think are worthwhile.

**Big grid of configurations. 3D iso views (or just 2d schematics). Check them off as I go**


Design Statement
----------------


Draft
-----

Stack effect picture, how it works, how you do sizing, practical scenarios.



Material Cost
-------------
How much do you have to work with to get to $5, $10, VISUALIZE it.



Big Problems with Secondary Air in Belonio Burners
---------------------------------------------------

- We see huge changes in secondary air from small changes in dimensions
- Why? What can be done?

- FURTHER: the reaction time of CO. The diffusion burners CANT burn up the CO? (very unlikely there is enough residence time.)


Sizing of Combustion
--------------------

Don't want to make it too small, losses from water will dominate, and you'll never get to a boil. (pull from Jeter charts to approximate the amount.)







At the bottom of the post, I'll share a list of materials and tools that are useful for prototyping. These materials are low cost, easy to fabricate, and/or are useful for stove building. You can buy this stuff at the store or find it in the wild as Obtainium.

Materials and Tools useful for Prototyping

Tin Cans
Coffee Cans
Paint Cans
Garbage Pails
Used Coffee Kettles
Duct work (it fits together easily, can be worked with tin shears by hand, fasted with screws. Comes in standard sizes so you can mix and match components.)
Wire mesh
Aluminum Flashing
Anything from the 'grill' section
PVC (obviously not for anything near a fire, but useful for attaching fans)
Perlite (buy it at the garden supplier, use it for insulation)
Tin Shears
Pop rivets




Calculate how big a stove we would need
---------------------------------------

Include Kelly Kettle? Higher HT eff?



Efficiency as a marker
----------------------

(later in the process?)


Lavoisier
--------

(reminds us to be quantitative. plus, he enabled us pyros.)

It is generally accepted that Lavoisier's great accomplishments in chemistry largely stem from the fact that he changed the science from a qualitative to a quantitative one. Lavoisier is most noted for his discovery of the role oxygen plays in combustion. 

http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/6c/Antoine_lavoisier_color.jpg





Metrics
------

Sorting through promises by manufacturers and designers is a mess.

It's like they're out to purposefully confuse you. Numbers are reported in different units. Made-up quantities are used for performance. Sometimes numbers aren't used at all. "It's super efficient" "It's ultra clean" "It's amazing!"

A particularly insidious obfuscation method comes from us, the engineers. We've invented vocabularies to describe physical phenomena: heat transfer, radiation, convection, conduction, excess air, turbulence, etc. These words have very precise meaning within the discipline of engineering. However, it is just as easy to use this vocabulary to purposefully confuse conversations in order to promote our agendas. 

I don't think this is fair. 

You can use your privileged engineering knowledge to add to the cloud of confusion or to cut through it, exposing the charlatans and commending the clear-thinkers.







Day 3: table of existing technology. Diagram of size, capability. 
Table!




Day 4 : Importance, Meaning of Excess Air
-----



Day 3 : Practical Rice Husk Combustion
-----

Reaching high heat transfer efficiencies in a rice husk gasifier can be difficult because of the combustion characteristics of rice husk producer gas.

- poorly tuned EA will drop off efficiency very quickly
- mm sized gaps result in big EA differences
- mixing and large gas production (V vs. A)

So, can the flame be stabilized? 

Can we control air supply effectively over the course of a burn?


Day 2 : Targets
-----

Design and invention is a tricky process. On the one hand, you've got to be aiming at something, otherwise you will flounder around in the vast sea of poor designs. On the other, you can't aim too directly, otherwise you will miss opportunities to discover something new.

One means I've found that is useful is to determine that something is possible from first principles, then try to work out the details in getting there.

It turns out that there are a great many things that are possible, just no one has tried them before. In heat transfer engineering, you can approach it this way: what's the theoretical maximum efficiency? Do existing devices reach it?

For rice husk water boiling it looks something like this.

What would the required fuel use be to boil a pot of water?

At 100% efficiency, you would need X kg of rice husk.

What are some efficiencies that real stoves have reached? (around 45% OTE). That means X kg of fuel are necessary.

What volume of device would be required for this?

(row of form factors drawings)

What is there actually out there right now?

(compare to form factor drawings, maybe in red?)

So, we can see that to boil 3 L of water, there's an opportunity.

Why might such a device not have been designed yet?


Day 1
-----

In December 2012, two missionaries welcomed me into their homes in Cambodia to see if I could help advance their improved cook stove work in and around Battambang, Cambodia.

These two missionaries, Kent and Becky Good, did extraordinary work. They could speak Khmer. They fed me the best duck soup I had had in my two years in Southeast Asia. They balanced a great many community projects in language, religion, and business.

I learned a great deal about the cooking conditions in rural Cambodia. We made a lot of progress improving stove designs together.

Unfortunately, we never arrived at a final design. I have been thinking about the problem since. I have finally managed to carve out some time and resources to approach this design problem again. 

I'm calling the device the BECKY BOILER because of Becky's patience for Kent's experiments. 

Now, one of my major principles in designing for the developing world is to try to avoid a "solutions focused" approach. Because of the enormous complexity of designing products outside of your cultural and socioecomonic frame, I believe that it is essentially impossible that your invention will "save the world." Even Norman Borlaug's advances in wheat genetics nearly didn't make it to people in time.

On the other hand, it's difficult for your involvement with a community to not benefit it in some way. Whether it is increased awareness of their issues, knowledge exchange, or simply being an extra set of hands to help with work.

In that spirit, this design exercise will be both about driving at a novel technical achievement as well as a meaningful documentation effort of some of the knowledge I accrued the last two years working in rural Southeast Asia.








Misc
----

Today, I want to do a system-level calculation of the stove's power (Cooking Power) and efficiency (Overall Thermal Efficiency). We can ignore everything that goes on inside the reactor and focus on just the starting and ending conditions of the device.

Cooking Power is a measure of how quickly a stove can heat something up. High power means you can transfer energy quickly. Low power means you transfer energy slowly. We need to know two things to do the calculation.

(1) How hot the stove was able to heat a pot of water
(2) How long it took to achieve this temperature change

Here is an example test result from Kent Good in Cambodia

Time | 12 minutes
Volume Water | 5 Liters
Temperature Start | 31 C
Temperature End | 99.1 C

The energy required to change the temperature of water from 99.1 to 31 C is calculated this way:

...


Therefore, the stove supplied 

... kJ of energy

Power is simply this amount of energy divided by the time

kJ / 12 min = kW






(a) How much fuel was used during firing

We will use these to calculate

(1) Cooking Power
(2) Overall Thermal Efficiency

A rice husk gasifier transforms the energy contained in a grain of rice husk into heat energy used to increase the temperature of a cooking pot or pan.

To boil a pot of water, you need to supply the water about XX kJ of energy. That amount of energy will raise 5L of water from 30 C to 100 C.







(a series of techniques?)
* obtainium
  - list useful obtainium
* design the tests
* combustion analyzer
* proxy fuels

why prototype?

- hard to visualize
- many factors, predict, test, repeat
- pick up momentum
- point of reference
-

***


The majority of people reading through this won't already be familiar with rice husk gasifiers. As a result, my previous


Today, I'll walk through the baseline engineering quantities that I think will be useful for this design project.


Power -- Measured in kW (kiloJoule per second) -- this is the rate at which energy is transferred from one body to another. A high power stove will heat something _faster_ than a low power stove. If the two stoves have the same amount of fuel, the total energy transferred by the two stoves will be the same. One will just do it faster.

Fuel Consumption -- 

Batch time --

Heating profile -- 

Efficiency -- this is a really tricky quantity. It is supposed to be a measure of how much energy is lost by your stove. It turns out that it's not so easy to agree on a good definition for this quantity.

For now, I will use efficiency in a really simple way. I will only use it for estimates of stove performance and as an indicator of poor performance. 

Let's use these quantities to answer some useful questions. 

Can I cook a pot of beans with this?
How big of a pot of beans can I cook with this device?
If I only have time to collect 50 lb of rice husk a week, how much water could I boil?

This post is not even close to the last word in promoting clear engineering communication. There won't be a last word because the whole thing is a process. Each time something comes up, you can choose to express it in a straightforward or to hide behind a veil of complexity. 

Ultimately, this is about your own understanding as much as it is about the understanding of others. Your own ego will push you to gloss over truly understanding something if it risks proving your ideas are no good. This hurts in the short run, but it's better in the long run. You want to develop a solid foundation of knowledge, one that you can confidently deploy against the natural world and see it hold up.

Tomorrow, I'll apply them to a variety of devices.


(tangle to show how much you can cook with different power levels?)
